When we talk about climate
change and coastal risk,
very often people really worry about flooding.
But in places like Staten Island,
risk is also about storm waves
and coastal erosion.
Living Breakwaters is a coastal resilience
project offshore of Tottenville, State Island.
And it’s designed to reduce
wave heights and energy,
and help control shoreline erosion.
The overall layout and design
of the Living Breakwaters
was developed through
a pretty complex modeling process.
We had to test how they worked.
Would they attenuate waves
coming from different directions?
Would they build the beach back?
One of the most exciting
parts about the project
is it isn’t just designed
to be about risk reduction;
it’s about creating habitat.
This area used to have oyster reefs.
And shells and reef create this complex
habitat with lots of niches and crevices.
And the breakwaters are designed
to have that complexity, too.
One of the key intents of the Living Breakwaters
is that it’s not just this project.
It’s going to work differently in different places,
but we really hope that many of the techniques
piloted and used in the breakwaters
can be replicable in other communities.